Hey everybody, welcome back to the Menlo Midweek Podcast.
We are so glad to have you today.
My name is Matt.
And my name is Brett.
And today we are your hosts.
Talking about this past Sunday.
This past Sunday.
Big week.
It was a big week.
Yeah.
For those of you who don't know, Brett is our director of NextGen.
I feel like everybody knows probably you more than me.
I don't know about that.
The various circles you run in, man.
You are all over the place.
And you've been here how long now?
I've been here 13 years.
Bro.
Yeah.
Legend.
legendary.
Um, well, uh, it is great to have Brett on the podcast today.
So, uh, we're going to talk about this past Sunday, Brett.
Yeah.
It was a student Sunday, student Sunday.
Now I will say for me, having worked at the campus level and at the central level, I do notice, uh, this vibe that occurs with adults who are on campus and regularly serving in various capacities in the church.
When we say,
we're going to allow our students to like run a Sunday.
There's like this sort of controlled chaos and like unease of like, okay, like we're letting the kids drive the car now.
So what's it like for you?
What do you, what stands out most to you for students Sunday across our campus?
Like how does that, how does all of this coalesce and land on you as a leader?
Yeah, that's a great question.
You know, I think when we talk about students Sunday, there's been a kind of a wide range of what that has looked like or what that can look like.
What I would I'll just say what I love about students and they how I kind of have approached and what I've loved about this year is when worship talked about student Sunday of here's what we're going to do.
They were talking about what we want for this to be is a picture of.
what can the church look like when it's not just like here's students running everything and then adults are on the side, but here's what it looks like when the church is all generations serving and leading and working together.
And I think that's kind of what we ended up seeing at our campuses where you had students hosting alongside the AFP's or you had students in the band alongside adults or people greeting alongside other adults that it's not like a either or thing, but it's a where this church together.
So as like from my seat, that's what I enjoy seeing is just like, okay,
We actually are working together and this is a picture of who Menlo can be if we truly become like an intergenerational church.
That's great.
And I think for me when I see it, you know, I see how that participation is formational.
I remember what it was like to be a high school student and there were spaces or things that I felt like I couldn't own because I wasn't invited or asked to do it.
But when I was, I was like, hey, this is awesome.
It's kind of like back to the car thing like,
like someone flipping you the keys and saying like, hey, park my car.
You're like, really?
I get to do this.
And like, there's just something fun about that.
So my next question is, what do you see in adults that maybe they're processing or maybe even misunderstanding about the faith of Gen Z or Gen Alpha?
What do you see in adults?
Yeah, I think all of us have a natural tendency
to think about when we think about students, we think about what it was like when we were a student, and to say what we went through is exactly what they're going through now.
And yes, there are similarities.
But what I see adults who are really connecting with the next generation, they're adults who are very curious.
They ask questions.
They try to understand what is happening.
And they take time to actually learn like,
Yeah, what is going on in a student's life?
What are they asking?
And I would say what I've noticed is that students' faith right now is they are very curious.
Like they want to know more.
They want to see a faith that is real.
They want to have a safe space to wrestle with their questions, even if the answers aren't very clear or it's not as black and white.
Because they're talking about these things in the school.
Thanks to social media.
You're constantly getting all sorts of answers for a lot of things.
And so students are wondering,
Where can I discuss these things?
And if they don't have it in the church, they find it elsewhere.
They do.
And those resources are abundant as well, right?
Yes, very much so.
I mean, you know, in our generation, it was, oh, yeah, let's go to ask geez, you know.
Get throwback.
Yeah, I know.
Really good throwback.
Classic millennial move.
And now,
There are so many ways they are over resourced to be able to find answers and I mean, maybe it's a benefit sort of of the AI Bloom that we're seeing where questions and curiosities lead to more questions and more curiosities and
It's a good diagnostic for the church to say like, okay, how are we orienting ourselves to be able to handle some of this, to be able to help internalize and metabolize some of the energy that they're bringing into this and respond accordingly in a way that's true and authentic.
But I love what Phil said on Sunday.
He was just like, hey, our students are not the church of tomorrow, they're the church of today.
And that's exactly the present time that we're living in.
Okay, so I want to get to a little bit of Phil's message here because I just thought it was good.
He had mentioned, you know, we talked about the passage around Jacob, and Jacob and Esau, and Jacob wrestling with God, the only dude that we know who actually like had a, you know, prize fight against the divine, which I think is really interesting.
And one.
And one?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, he got something out of it for sure.
Yeah, he had a permanent takeaway as well, which was interesting, but we'll get there.
Phil had said, you know, faith grows in wrestling.
not retreating.
And I would just ask, you know, where do you see some of our students wrestling right now?
I think, yeah, with faith questions, a lot of, I would say a lot of the wrestling questions that I will hear students ask are the same questions that we ask as adults.
Like it's questions of, can I believe this?
I'm seeing stuff in the news.
I hear about Christians.
And can I actually follow a God when I see Christians living in a way that doesn't seem to reflect the God that...
I'm told about in church, so they're wrestling in that way.
They're also wrestling with questions of identity and purpose of who am I?
Because as a student, you're constantly being told, this is who you are.
These are the classes that you need to take in order that you can get into that college to have that career.
And those are the things that define you.
They're looking for purpose of knowing like, do I matter?
And so I think you see those restlings that are often also the same things we are too.
But it just, again, it looks different based on the context that they're in right now.
And I think a lot about the performative nature of the Bay Area, the scholar athletes, the academics that we have here.
Again, incredible resources and privileges for students to be able to engage in various different ways, but all of those have a formational energy to them.
Absolutely.
And they change the dynamic of how they're defining themselves.
sometimes it's you know what it's like to be a kid sometimes it's a while before you figure out who you are even in the college realm like you step into that and like you know legally you're an adult and but it doesn't feel that way right yeah yeah and it's I mean talking about the Bay Area the performative nature like I've had so many conversation with students who say I really want to make my faith a priority but
I also have this tutor.
I also have this sports team.
I also have this play.
I have these things that I have to do.
And they, if I don't do those things, I can't be a part of them.
Whereas faith, there's not really that like, if you don't do this now, sorry, you're out because we always want them to be welcomed here and feel like they belong, but they constantly are living in this tension and wrestling with how do I make time for the thing that I know I really want to, but that's not going to get me into college.
Yeah.
And sometimes, I'm thinking back to Phil's message, he mentioned how we have RAM, random access memory for different aspects of our lives, and that sometimes, maybe it's too many tabs are open, too many things are happening, God crashes the system of our lives.
And I've encountered many students, and I'm sure you have, where they're on the athletic track for school, and then they get an injury that changes everything.
or they're testing into something and they fail miserably.
And I mean, if that hasn't happened to you when you're young, it's likely that pain is out there for you somewhere into adulthood.
And so I would just say, if you're young, how do we help students interpret that experience as mercy instead of failure?
Yeah, great question.
I think the first thing we always have to try to remember
is that we need to affirm who they are in Christ first, no matter what.
Because I think part of the reason why we crash so hard is because we're looking at those other things that define us.
And when those things crash, we begin to wonder, who am I?
And so if we are thoughtful around telling every single student, man, before you get that grade, before you get into that school, before you get whatever, you are somebody who is deeply loved by God.
and just constantly letting that be what we say.
I think that helps on the crashing end.
Of course, when students are surrounded by other voices saying the same thing, it's hard.
But that always has to be the first thing that we have to do.
And then I think beyond that is you just take time to sit with students and to help them see that God is with them in this, I'm with you in this, and that's not gonna change it.
We're in the season where you're naming the different things
Things that might happen to students.
We're in the college acceptance and rejection season.
And this is something that when I moved to the Bay Area, I was shocked by.
Because when I grew up in college or grew up in high school in East Tennessee, you would apply to a couple of schools and you'd probably get into one.
Nowadays, some students are applying to 20 to 30 schools.
And yes, you might get into a school, but every time you get a rejection,
Even if it's not a school you want to go to, you begin to wonder what's wrong with me.
And so you get to that crashing moment.
It's like, how do we just walk alongside them and tell them?
Yeah, that's great.
This is who you are.
Yep.
And I do think that rejection can build resilience.
Absolutely.
But at the same time, if you don't have a core foundational principled nature on your own identity and how that connects back to the God who made you, it can feel really
on mooring and devastating in a lot of ways.
And so that's just a great point.
across all of our campuses as well.
We also celebrate a baptism, which is just a great next step of faith that we see people taking.
So we had a big weekend, we had students Sunday, we had a great message, and we had baptisms.
And I would just say, I saw some grown-ups get baptized.
I've had the privilege of baptizing both grown-ups and students at Menlo.
But I would just ask you, Brett, as a leader for students, and you've kind of got your hand on the pulse of all that, what do you think it does for students to see adults take a step of baptism?
Yeah, I think one of the, this is some of the reasons why we have adults in students' lives as life group leaders is when you have an adult in a student's life, they get a little picture of this is what my life could be like in the future, or this is like, I could actually potentially follow Jesus as an adult.
And I think it also communicates, hey, it's never too late to come to Jesus.
And so when students get to see adults professing their faith, they're seeing somebody who's
beyond them in years, whatever it may be, whether it's older or even just 10 years.
And they see, okay, this is somebody that I can look up to.
and potentially become for the next generation.
I think even the students who are getting baptized, like at all of our campuses, we didn't have our middle school ministry meet at their normal time this week because we had them in the service to watch baptisms.
And at Mountain View, we had three high school students get baptized at the 1130.
And so the middle schoolers got to be in there.
And one of those high schoolers was a life group leader for the middle schoolers.
And so those middle school students got to see their leader profess their faith
and say, I want to live my life to follow him.
And so if you're a student and you're seeing somebody you look up to do that, I can't imagine it to do anything but make you more excited about following Jesus.
Yeah.
One generation blesses another.
And I mean, again, just calling it back to my own teenage years, I can recall with great clarity the names of the adults that invested into my life, what they did for me, and how it made a difference.
And to even see
their growth and their trajectory is inspiring to me as a young person saying, we are never done growing.
God has never done working on us.
And I feel like baptisms are a great reminder of that.
And in a way now as a believer with a couple years in, I feel when I see people take a step of faith in that regard, it reminds me of that own time in my life where I reconnected with what God was doing.
But baptism, it's an uncommon act.
We don't have a framework for it in the secular world.
And I just think it's one of those things where because it's not a regular practice, because it is a sacred practice, it feels counter-cultural to students.
How do you communicate with students when you're talking about what baptism is and why it matters for them?
What do you say to them?
Yeah, this is actually one of the big questions that students oftentimes have because they say, hey, I followed Jesus.
So why should I get baptized?
And part of what I'll talk to them about in that is that when we get baptized, like obviously we don't believe that baptism saves us.
But it is a chance that you are kind of making it known that you are living your life to follow Jesus.
And in a sense, when we're
When we're getting baptized, we're throwing a party for you.
And it's not just for you, but it's for the entire church to say, hey, you aren't just making this decision for yourself, but now you are a part of us.
You are a part of this community.
And we promise to be walking alongside of you to support you.
Like we talk about a lot, the covenant community that like we are the people who want to be with you for the rest of your life.
And so telling students that this isn't just a you thing.
Um, like Jesus got baptized and Jesus said an example for us of this is how we get to do it.
And now we get to go and do the same.
And so when you share your story, you are not just, um, saying the one other, I've made this decision, but you're also blessing the community as well.
And so kind of talking with them about that.
Cause I would say more often, like, yeah, more often than not, I'm having conversations with students or saying, I'm not really sure if I want to do this.
And typically it's, I, I'm not,
sure I want to be in front of everybody because it's a little, yeah, if you're, if you're shy or if you're introverted, you're like, I don't want to do that.
But it's like helping them understand that, no, this is a chance that we get to just celebrate and proclaim the good news to the larger church.
And I would just say, if you're listening in your, you've got, you know, maybe you felt the call to be baptized before, or you wanted to take that step, but you've avoided it because of the public nature of it.
I would just say that public
moment for you is just a moment, but it can matter so much in the life of someone else, someone young or old.
It could be a moment of inspiration.
And when Jesus had that moment, I mean, it was sort of captured for all of us to see, but it inspired so many in the process.
And what I love about the nature of baptism is that, especially for a young person, it
removes that pressure to perform.
You're there, but you're not actually there for you.
You're there because God has done the work in you.
And it wasn't anything that you had to achieve.
It was something that was gifted to you.
So I'm just saying, if you're listening and you're like, yeah, baptism feels cool, but I'm not ready to take that.
We would love to talk to you about that because it makes a difference in so many lives.
And I love that we've now started recording everybody's story before they get baptized, so that we both get to watch it and hear it together.
But also it's a gift for
the students or the people who get baptized, they get to go back and watch their story and be reminded of, this is why I made that decision.
And I hear every single time we do a baptism sermon, people come up to me afterwards and just say, well, one, the person getting baptized says how grateful they were that they actually made this decision.
And then two people in the congregation will come up and say, this was absolutely my favorite Sunday of the year.
Yeah, yep, yep.
Filmmaker, Cameron Crow,
He, I watch an interview with him once, and he said he doesn't journal at all.
He never writes down his thoughts.
He makes mixtapes.
Literally.
Yes, like of the songs that are playing at different seasons in his life.
And he says, every once in a while, like I'll pop in an old mixtape from a few years ago.
He's like, and it is just as good as a diary.
He's like, I remember everything that was happening to me and through me in that season.
And I would just say like baptism and that moment
like that's your mixtape.
Yeah, like that's God saying to you like, hey, here's what I did in and through you in this season of life.
And I don't want you to forget that.
And that, I mean, it's true for me, it's true for so many.
And that just resonates with me.
So one of the other things we talked about is Jacob in the sermon.
And he wrestles with God.
But before he got his new name, he had to say his old one.
And I think in a generation that is constantly curating an identity, how do we help students wrestle honestly with who they are in God?
Yeah, in some ways, I think this goes back to what I was saying earlier.
If we just have to be constant repeaters first of who they are, like constantly saying that before we ask them questions about how did they do or anything like that, just talks to them about
how they've been created, who God says they are.
Because when we start with that foundation, it gives them the freedom to kind of wrestle, because I think sometimes the reason they might be afraid to wrestle is they're afraid of, if I speak up about this, is that going to change somebody's perspective of me?
So if we start with saying who you are and you're going to be loved and cared for no matter what, it creates a safe space for that.
One of the things we do at
In some of our high school ministries, we do this at Mountain Dew every week, which you know is we have a question box where students can put in any question they want about anything.
And we will take it out and we will talk about that question for three to five minutes.
And why we do that is because at the very beginning, I'll say we do this.
so that because we want the church to be a safe space where you can wrestle with anything, where there is nothing that you say, nothing that you ask, that'll change the way we view you, because we believe every single person is created in the image of God.
And so because of that, feel free to ask questions.
God's not afraid of your questions, so let's wrestle together.
So I think it's just creating that space constantly saying, you are safe, you are loved, nothing will change that.
And letting it happen.
Yeah, that's good.
And it's, I mean, it models the pattern of Jesus.
Jesus was not afraid of questions or confrontation in that regard.
And the way he directed and taught people is that he sat with them in the process and listened intently and walked alongside them.
And in an age where
Education really feels transactional.
It's kind of a one way thing of like, hey, you need to know this, you need to do this.
There's not a lot of space for people to ask questions and then have someone walk alongside them in the process.
And that's what I love of how we disciple our students is that we stay alongside them.
And that is a true formational practice that extends not only into our kids and students programs, but well into adulthood as well.
And so I would say, if you're listening,
You've maybe heard the message or maybe you didn't, but you feel this sense of retreat instead of wrestling in your life.
I would encourage you to engage and take a small step this week.
I don't know what that looks like for you.
Maybe you'll consider serving.
Maybe you'll put an inquiry forward and get to know our students a bit more.
I mean, there's plenty of places to serve in our student programs, right?
Or maybe you'll just reach out to one of our staff members and grab coffee, whatever that looks like.
I just hope that you continue to wrestle with whatever's going on in your life.
And so we're only in week two of this series.
I am the God who gets close, but Brett, what do you sense that God might be calling or shaping for our church through this series?
Yeah, I mean, I think my biggest hope, I guess we talk about the God who gets close is that our church understands
kind of understands that, that God actually is a God who wants to get close, and that for us as a church, we need to be close to one another.
That's close to the people that we're sitting in our rows with on Sundays, but also close to our neighbors, because the way that we live that out, it reflects the reality that God is a God who gets close.
One of the things we're talking about in
dive which is one of our student events right now is what it means to be a thoughtful witness and talking about what does it mean to be led by love and that when we love well it shows people a god who loves well and so how do we model that and so as we're doing this series like as a church my yeah my biggest hope is that it
leads us to being a community that actually wants to be close with one another, that we create a safe space for people to wrestle, that we create a safe space for people to ask, who am I?
What is my purpose in life?
And that the answer they get is that that can be found in God and we're going to walk through it with you.
That is so great too.
I'm experiencing that firsthand in Alpha right now.
Alpha is our faith exploration environment and
So many good questions and so many great things that come up with that.
We actually had a baptism on Sunday.
Chloris, one of our Alpha participants, she's been attending faithfully and she has found community and connection through Alpha.
And I've loved seeing that because there's something about this time and season for her that resonated with her soul and she felt emboldened enough to take a next step.
And then there are just like very easy on ramps.
coming up at the end of this month, March 28th, we've got four of the Bay 5K.
You're hosting.
I'm hosting.
Which is exciting.
Which is a good excuse not to run.
I know.
So thank you, Matt.
Yeah, I know.
Well, that's me too.
People are like, you're going to run.
I'm like, no, no, no.
Someone's got to run this.
Yeah, yeah.
I've got to run it.
That's the way I'm ejecting out of that.
But I would say if you're listening, and even if you just walk, there's a 1K and a 5K option for you, but it's going to be great.
We're going to be at Shoreline Park in Mountain View in what we call the kite flying area.
We got kites this year.
I hope there's wind that day, but it's a very easy on-ramp because it's something that we're saying for the community.
we're doing this for the bay.
And we are sponsoring and highlighting our local partners, our premier partners, Mobilize Love, but we're also gonna have Hope Horizon and East Palo Alto there and a couple other partners, Bay Area Medical Missions.
So if this sounds interesting to you, sign up now, like get on there, go to Menlo-Dottcher slash connect, register for For the Bay 5K, it's gonna be a great time.
We've got almost 200 signed up now.
And we're looking at 450, so there's plenty of time this month.
We'll even put a For the Bay
5k couch to 5k plan in I'll put this in the notes make sure you get it here So if you're like, I don't run at all be I will help you with that I'm not doing it, but I will help you get there personally And encourage you along the way well I'll say one of the things I love about events like this is you also get to see a picture of how the church is so much bigger than your campus and
because sometimes you only see my church as the people I see on Sunday.
And so you get a picture of, okay, no, we actually are one church in many locations.
But also this is a great event to invite your neighbor to.
To say, hey, come run with me because we believe that God is a God who is for the bay.
And so we want to be for the bay as well.
Yeah, I love it.
Well, thanks for listening in this week.
If you are interested or want to continue the conversation with us on a more individual basis, you can text our team 65060004
Zero or two.
Thanks for joining us.
We'll see you next week.
Bye-bye.
See ya.